---
title: "Books on My Bookshelf for 2014"
date: 2014-01-08 
url: "/2014/1/7/books-on-my-bookshelf-for-2014/"
---


I decided to take stock of the books that are sitting on my bookshelf for 2014.
Here is that list.

Starting with some (of my) classics. These are books that I read in the
middle/high school time period in my life.

#### [Basic Technical Mathematics with Calculus](http://www.amazon.com/Basic-Technical-Mathematics-Calculus-Edition/dp/0133116530?tag=christophe067-20)

 (note: my version is the second edition. It looks like they’re up to the tenth)

This was a book that let me explore math on my own. It goes from trig functions
through linear equations, logarithms, determinants and matrices, derivatives,
integration, series expansion and differential equations. A little beyond what
my AP Calc class ended up taking us through. I would suggest it if you have an
interest in Mathematics and Calculus at an advanced high school level.

#### Texas Instruments TI-83+ Manual

I read this cover to cover one day. It led through the days of BASIC on a
calculator in Math class, where I would program equation solvers and games.

## Distributed Systems

#### Distributed Systems Concepts and Design

The purchase of this book was driven by my interest in Erlang and Riak Core. I
was hoping that this would give me some good information on distributed systems
but it’s a bit of a slog to parse the wordiness of the book. Preferable would be
to surf the repos of various open source projects. The table of contents,
however, is useful in pointing you to on the path to those projects.

#### [Parallel and Concurrent Programming in Haskell](http://www.amazon.com/Parallel-Concurrent-Programming-Haskell-Multithreaded/dp/1449335942/?tag=christophe067-20)

A solid book that takes you through parallelism and concurrency in Haskell with
plenty of code to work with. Concepts covered include Data Parallel Programing,
GPU programming, MVars, Software Transactional Memory and finally
distributed-process, which is an attempt to create a sort of Erlang-as-a-package
for Haskell.


## Databases

#### [Readings in Database Systems](http://www.amazon.com/Readings-Database-Systems-Joseph-Hellerstein/dp/0262693143?tag=christophe067-20)

Databases are not my specialty, so I use this book as some casual reading. It is
a collection of academic papers relating to databases.


## Lisp, Lambda Calculus and Functional Programming

#### [An Introduction to Functional Programming Through Lambda Calculus](http://www.amazon.com/Introduction-Functional-Programming-Calculus-Mathematics/dp/0486478831?tag=christophe067-20)

This is a fun book that take you through the lambda calculus with a functional
slant. Includes some comparisons with Lisp and Scheme later in the book.

#### [Pearls of Functional Algorithm Design](http://www.amazon.com/Pearls-Functional-Algorithm-Design-Richard/dp/0521513383?tag=christophe067-20)

A nice look at functional algorithms with plenty of Haskell code. I quite enjoy
this book when I’m in an algorithmic mood.

#### [Common Lisp](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~dst/LispBook/)

Widely recognized as a great introduction to the Common Lisp language. I don’t
write as much Lisp as I would like to, but having mocl around for
experimentation sure helps.

#### [Let Over Lambda](http://letoverlambda.com/)

Let Over Lambda is billed as a book about macros, in other words a book to move
you from intermediate lisper to professional. I’d like to spend a little more
time with Common Lisp over the next year and Let Over Lambda will be one of the
books I use to do that.


## Training

For those that don’t know, I train for Volleyball and High Jump. Having played
Division 1 Volleyball in college I still enjoy training and competing at a high
level. These books help me move towards my athletic goals.

#### [Weightlifting Programming: A Winning Coach’s Guide](http://www.amazon.com/Weightlifting-Programming-Winning-Coachs-Guide/dp/0980011159?tag=christophe067-20)

This is a book by a well respected coach in the weightlifting community. Since I
use Olympic lifts in my training this will help me program my lifting workouts
for greater effect.

#### [Overcoming Gravity](http://www.amazon.com/Overcoming-Gravity-Systematic-Gymnastics-Bodyweight/dp/1467933120?tag=christophe067-20)

I’m not a huge fan of doing bench press, bicep curls, etc. So I got this book
about training gymnastics movements to supplement my Olympic lifting, especially
my upper body which I don’t need excess hypertrophy on.

#### [Abs on the Ball: A Pilates Approach to Building Superb Abdominals](http://www.amazon.com/Abs-Ball-Approach-Building-Abdominals/dp/089281098X?tag=christophe067-20)

In the past I’ve found Pilates on exercise balls to be a great way to improve
core strength and stability. Colleen Craig’s books have been on my shelf for
awhile and I often take exercises from them. Core strength will help me in my
lifts, gymnastics training and controlling my body in the air while jumping for
High Jump and Volleyball.

#### [Becoming a Supple Leopard: The Ultimate Guide to Resolving Pain, Preventing Injury, and Optimizing Athletic Performance](http://www.amazon.com/Becoming-Supple-Leopard-Preventing-Performance/dp/1936608588?tag=christophe067-20)

This is a book I use for preventative maintenance of joints and muscles. I went
to an arthritis specialist in college who told me that my joints were
hypermobile, which means that I can do things like dislocate my shoulder or
those weird thumb/finger tricks you may have seen people do, all over my body.
Preventative maintenance is therefore particularly important in my mind.


## Other

The final book on my shelf for 2014 is Sartre’s L’existentialisme est un
humanisme in the original French.
