---
title: Components vs AST manipulation in MDX
date: 2019-01-11T06:54:10.528Z
tags:
  - mdx
  - gatsby
---

MDX presents a new paradigm for people currently using
remark (or other markdown rendering approaches). When using
remark the most common option to get shortcodes, or other
novel behavior, inside a markdown file is to do AST
manipulation via remark plugins. This has led to an
ecosystem of plugins that assume you're using remark and
thus directly insert html blobs into the remark AST. This is
an example of plugins assuming that they're going to be run
in a specific environment with a specific use case.... but
this post isn't really about assumptions people made before
there was a different option, not panning out for that new
option. That's a fact of life in engineering; Your
assumptions today probably won't hold up to the future.

This post is about composition, it's about components, and
it's about React.

# ASTs are unfamiliar

MDX presents new opportunities to democratize the
implementation of interesting functionality both in how we
render markdown, and how we construct markdown. Restricting
novel behavior to AST manipulation means that people who
know how React works, but that didn't take an AST course in
college, might be at a loss when trying to progress. That's
not to say AST knowledge isn't useful, it's increasingly a
power tool in today's JavaScript world because of tools like
[Babel](https://babeljs.io/) and
[jscodeshift](https://github.com/facebook/jscodeshift)....
but it's still a power tool.

Powerful tools that manipulate ASTs often require vast
knowledge to apply consistently to generic situations. While
this knowledge is both achievable and within reach of many
people, we don't always have the time to upskill into a new
skill set. The more we provide for the time-strapped "can I
get this done in the next 30min before I leave work"
engineer, the more people it will be accessible to
generally.

React is a great option in this space. Writing React
components is a skill that is probably more ubiquitous than
AST manipulation is in the JavaScript community, especially
amongst beginners. Moving away from AST manipulation as our
primary tool for modifying markdown also enables the use of
powerful abstractions that are only getting more powerful:
Suspense, Hooks, dynamic imports, etc.

# A new model

Like I said earlier in this post: MDX allows us to change
the way we render markdown and also the way we modify the
content of markdown itself. Using the component model that
has established itself over the last few years means we can
enable more people to build more powerful interfaces while
keeping the overhead for content editors to a minimum.

## Rendering Markdown

Markdown typically renders to HTML. A small markdown
document such as:

    # A Heading

    some content

    ```js
    const thing = {}
    ```

can be visualized as HTML like:

```html
<h1>A Heading</h1>
<p>some content</p>
<pre>
  <code>
    const thing = {}
  </code>
</pre>
```

With MDX, we can replace each of these elements with a React
component:

```js
<MDXProvider
  components={{
    h1: props => <h1 {...props} />,
    p: props => <p {...props} />,
    pre: props => <pre {...props} />,
    code: props => <code {...props} />
  }}
>
  {mdx}
</MDXProvider>
```

This by itself isn't super powerful yet. We may attach some
styles to the heading, paragraph and other elements. What
_is_ powerful is the way we can take control of the element
to do... literally anything JavaScript can do. We can pull
in npm packages like
[`prism-react-renderer`](https://github.com/FormidableLabs/prism-react-renderer)
or
[`react-live`](https://github.com/FormidableLabs/react-live),
which handle syntax highlighting and creating a code
playground that works inside your browser respectively. We
can pass the code string to these npm packages and get
interesting functionality almost for free.

We can also start replacing AST manipulation with React
components.
[gatsby-remark-autolink-headers](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-remark-autolink-headers/)
adds a generated id field to all of our headings... and we
can do that in a React component.

```js
import slugify from "slugify";

export default ({ children, ...props }) => (
  <h1 id={slugify(children)} {...props}>
    {children}
  </h1>
);
```

This gives us more control over how the ids are generated
too, `slugify` takes options like `lower` to lowercase
headings or `replace` to replace spaces with a specific
character. You could even use your own or a different npm
package that offers this functionality as a function that
can be composed with other functions to build in interesting
functionality to your components.

```js
export default function getId(props) {
  return slugify(props.children);
}
```

hooks can be used to maintain interesting state. Here's on
that simply tracks hover state.

```js
export default props => {
  const [isHovered, ref] = useHover();
  return (
    <h1
      id={getId(props)}
      ref={ref}
      css={{ color: isHovered ? "ref" : "blue" }}
    >
      {props.children}
    </h1>
  );
};
```

We can expand this to even more interesting applications
like rendering a markdown code block as a language-specific
playgound that calls out to an API to run code and displays
the result. Each language can be lazy-loaded on-demand for
client-side rendering and rendered however we want on the
server. [go](https://play.golang.org/),
[Pony](https://playground.ponylang.io/), and
[Babel](https://babeljs.io/en/repl) have playgrounds/repls
that could be used liked this.

## Markdown Content

So replacing components can get pretty awesome, but we still
have the problem of introducing novel new functionality to
the _content_ of our markdown. Typically this is done via
[custom shortcode syntax](/post/towards-shortcodes-for-gatsby-sites)
that abuse the inline code syntax or introduce new meaning
to existing syntax like `[]`. Instead of introducing custom
syntax for shortcodes, we can rely on an established,
common, syntax: JSX.

JSX is powerful enough to do everything we need from out
shortcodes: basic declarations, attributes, and children. It
even has additional super powers. In the near future, we
could extend features like Gatsby's StaticQuery to be
automatically handled through React Components and Babel
manipulation. We could literally write:

```js
<RelatedPosts tag={["gatsby"]} />
```

and render a list of related posts to the current blog post
that get fetched through Gatsby's GraphQL data layer at
build time. The possibilities of replacing custom shortcode
implementations with React components is interesting and
useful.

# Fin

In this post I've tried to convince you that remark and the
AST manipulation it requires is a worse fit for the problems
we are trying to solve than MDX and React components. That's
not to say AST manipulation doesn't have it's uses, but they
should be relegated to advanced integration use cases like
[optimizing the images referenced in your markdown at build time and shipping blur-up features for each of them](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-remark-images/).
The future is components and that will require a mind shift
from the world of remark and other markdown processing
tools.
