export const meta = {
  title: "Authoring Queries in Themes",
  date: "2019-06-06T02:25:00.462Z",
  tags: ["gatsby", "gatsby-themes", "graphql"],
  slug: "/post/authoring-queries-in-themes"
};

Building composable themes requires a slightly different
mindset than building a conventional site. Consider the
following cases with one Gatsby theme and one site.

Our site is built as usual, with whatever tech we prefer,
etc. We also specify a theme as such:

```js
__experimentalThemes: ["gatsby-theme-mystuff"];
```

A typical query on a site can look like this. Note that
there's nothing inherently wrong with this query, it sorts
by the publish date, filters out draft posts. When using the
same query in a site however, there's one main aspect of
this query that becomes problematic quickly: `allMdx`.

```graphql
{
  allMdx(
    sort: { fields: [frontmatter___date], order: DESC }
    filter: { frontmatter: { draft: { ne: true } } }
  ) { ... }
}
```

To understand why `allMdx` is problematic in a themes
setting, consider the scenario where you have blog posts in
`content/posts` and pages that you've written using MDX in
`src/pages`. The blog posts need to be pulled into the
Gatsby node system using `gatsby-source-filesystem` and to
add a table of contents to our `src/pages` pages, we put
another `gatsby-source-filesystem` on `src/pages`. So we end
up with a config like this in our `gatsby-config.js`.

```js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-source-filesystem`,
      options: {
        path: `content/posts`,
        name: `posts`
      }
    },
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-source-filesystem`,
      options: {
        path: `src/pages`
      }
    }
  ]
};
```

So the query we've written collects _all_ of the `Mdx` nodes
across both filesystem sources, which is not likely to be
what we want. The problem gets worse when you introduce
plugins like
[gatsby-transformer-react-docgen](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/cfc5126ba604ceaaf561d51007d6b67d115106b3/packages/gatsby-transformer-react-docgen),
which generate Mdx nodes into the Gatsby system. This causes
even more content to match our query.

To fix this, we can take a variety of different paths. One
is to change the query to an `allFile` query. Functionally,
this is a similar query as our original `allMdx` query. The
main differences are that we end up fetching drafts as well
and we have to programmatically sort after we fetch as well.

```js
allFile(filter: { sourceInstanceName: { eq: "posts" } }) {
  edges {
    node {
      childMdx {
        ...
      }
    }
  }
}
```

One unfortunate consequence of this is that it locks us into
using files as our data source. If someone is using a
headless CMS then they can't use our theme with this query
because we are now querying the _source_ of our content
instead of the _format_.

# createNodeField

We can solve this problem by adding a new field to our
content: `isNote`. This is the ultimate in flexibility
because it allows us to define whatever we want as the
criteria for what constitutes a Note.

```js
exports.onCreateNode = ({ node, actions, getNode }) => {
  const { createNodeField } = actions;

  if (node.internal.type === `Mdx`) {
    const parent = getNode(node.parent);

    if (
      parent.internal.type === "File" &&
      parent.internalSourceName === "posts"
    ) {
      createNodeField({
        name: `isNote`,
        node,
        value: true
      });
    }
  }
};
```

Then if we have a `title` field in our `Mdx` files, we can
filter the result set:

```graphql
{
  allMdx(filter: { fields: { isNote: { eq: true } } }) {
    nodes {
      frontmatter {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
```

# Fin

This is very flexible in that it allows us to access every
field as we're used to on `Mdx` or any other type. It is
restricting in that we can't combine multiple types to
provide notes. To do that, we'll have to look in to
[Constructing Query Types in Themes](/post/constructing-query-types-in-themes).
