export const meta = {
  title: "Constructing Query Types in Themes",
  date: "2019-06-07T02:25:00.462Z",
  tags: ["gatsby", "gatsby-themes", "graphql"],
  slug: "/post/constructing-query-types-in-themes"
};

Previously, [we covered](/post/authoring-queries-in-themes)
how seemingly innocuous queries can prevent your themes from
being composable when used with other themes and even sites
you didn't plan for. In this post, we'll cover the core
issue a bit more directly.

# Querying Formats and Sources

To refresh your memory, we explored a query for `Mdx` nodes
and a similar query for `File` nodes, shown here.

```graphql
{
  allMdx(
    sort: { fields: [frontmatter___date], order: DESC }
    filter: { frontmatter: { draft: { ne: true } } }
  ) { ... }
}
```

```graphql
allFile(filter: { sourceInstanceName: { eq: "posts" } }) {
  edges {
    node {
      childMdx {
        ...
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The core problem with both of these queries is that we have
a conceptual content type that these represent (`BlogPost`,
`Note`, `AuthorBio`, etc) and we're querying a _format_
(`Mdx`) or a _source_ (`File`) and not a _content type_
(`BlogPost`). `Mdx` is how our files are written while
`File` is where our files come from. Neither accurately
represents a conceptual content type accurately, ie: what
the content means to us.

## Creating new types

So to start, we need to create a new type in the GraphQL
system called `BlogPost`. To do this, we'll use the
`sourceNodes` lifecycle method and the
[schema customization](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/2019-03-04-new-schema-customization/)
APIs. Specifically we're using `buildObjectType` to create a
new type with a set of resolvers at the same time.

Most of our fields have no resolvers defined because they
can be infered by Gatsby itself. There are roughly two types
of fields here:

1. fields whose values exist on the source object itself
2. fields that only return values after using the resolver
   to compute the value

For the second type of field we need to pass through our
resolver to the source type's resolver to get the final
value (note: this resolver code will be simplified by
additional future Gatsby APIs). We take this approach for
`excerpt` and `body`.

```js
// gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions, schema }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions;

  createTypes(
    schema.buildObjectType({
      name: `BlogPost`,
      fields: {
        id: { type: `ID!` },
        title: {
          type: "String!"
        },
        tags: { type: `[String]!` }
        excerpt: {
          type: "String!",
          resolve: async (source, args, context, info) => {
            const type = info.schema.getType(`Mdx`);
            const mdxNode = context.nodeModel.getNodeById({
              id: source.parent
            });
            const resolver = type.getFields()["excerpt"].resolve;
            const excerpt = await resolver(
              mdxNode,
              { pruneLength: 140 },
              context,
              {
                fieldName: "excerpt"
              }
            );
            return excerpt;
          }
        },
        body: {
          type: "String!",
          resolve(source, args, context, info) {
            const type = info.schema.getType(`Mdx`);
            const mdxNode = context.nodeModel.getNodeById({
              id: source.parent
            });
            const resolver = type.getFields()["body"].resolve;
            return resolver(mdxNode, {}, context, {
              fieldName: "body"
            });
          }
        },
      },
      interfaces: [`Node`]
    })
  );
};
```

So now we have our `BlogPost` type, but we still need some
nodes using that type. To do this, we'll use some
boilerplate `createNode` calls that translates fairly
directly from MDX frontmatter to `BlogPost` fields. We only
want to create `BlogPost` nodes from `Mdx` nodes with `File`
parents from the `posts` filesystem source in this case. We
could, in the future, source `BlogPost`s from different
places as well.

```js
// gatsby-node.js
const crypto = require("crypto");

exports.onCreateNode = ({
  node,
  actions,
  getNode,
  createNodeId
}) => {
  const {
    createNodeField,
    createNode,
    createParentChildLink
  } = actions;

  if (node.internal.type === `Mdx`) {
    const { frontmatter } = node;
    const parent = getNode(node.parent);

    if (
      parent.internal.type === "File" &&
      parent.sourceInstanceName === "posts"
    ) {
      const fieldData = {
        title: node.frontmatter.title,
        tags: node.frontmatter.tags || []
      };

      createNode({
        ...fieldData,
        // Required fields.
        id: createNodeId(`${node.id} >>> BlogPost`),
        parent: node.id,
        children: [],
        internal: {
          type: `BlogPost`,
          contentDigest: crypto
            .createHash(`md5`)
            .update(JSON.stringify(fieldData))
            .digest(`hex`),
          content: JSON.stringify(fieldData),
          description: `Blog Posts`
        }
      });

      createParentChildLink({
        parent: parent,
        child: node
      });
    }
  }
};
```

Once we've done this, the following query will always work
regardless of if we have any `BlogPost`s in the node system.
Note that even though we haven't coded any explicit support
for filtering or sorting, we can still use them because
Gatsby handles that for us.

Note also that because we created a parent/child
relationship for the `BlogPost` nodes, we can reach up into
any of the parents to access interesting information, so no
user of our theme will be overly restricted if they want to
do something outside of the 80% use case.

```graphql
{
  allBlogPost(sort: { fields: title, order: ASC }) {
    totalCount
    nodes {
      title
      tags
      body

      parent {
        ... on Mdx {
          parent {
            ... on File {
              relativePath
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

With no posts, the result is:

```js
{
  "data": {
    "allBlogPost": {
      "totalCount": 0,
      "nodes": []
    }
  }
}
```

With results, we get the following instead (note: I've
removed the body value for brevity as it can get quite
long).

```js
{
  "data": {
    "allBlogPost": {
      "totalCount": 2,
      "nodes": [
        {
          "title": "Something Else",
          "tags": [],
          "body": "",
          "parent": {
            "parent": {
              "relativePath": "page-2.mdx"
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "title": "my post",
          "tags": [],
          "body": "",
          "parent": {
            "parent": {
              "relativePath": "index.mdx"
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

# Fin

Now we've gotten ourselves to a point where we can use a
`BlogPost` type instead of `Mdx`, simplifying our code base
and also ensuring that when users of our theme want to query
for blog posts on their pages, they don't have to worry
about filtering all of the other `Mdx` or `File` results
out.
