export const meta = {
  title: "Gatsby Shadow Contexts",
  date: "2019-09-15T00:00:00.000Z",
  tags: ["gatsby", "gatsby-themes"],
  slug: "/post/gatsby-shadow-contexts"
};

Gatsby's Shadowing functionality works on the concept of a
"shadow context" or "shadow set". This concept doesn't have
a specific name because it is never mentioned in the code at
all and is purely conceptual for understanding how shadowing
works. Let's say a Gatsby site has a set of themes
installed. We'll list the final ordering of themes here,
regardless of whether they were horizontally or vertically
integrated into the site.

```js
const themes = [
  `theme-a`,
  `theme-b-parent`,
  `theme-b`,
  `theme-c`
];
```

While talking about shadow contexts we have a shadow root
and possible shadow paths. The root is the file that is
potentially going to be shadowed and the paths are the paths
competing for the opportunity to shadow the root. Let's say
we have a root in `theme-a`. In this case it's a `header`
React component, but the file content doesn't actually
matter for this discussion.

```
theme-a/src/components/header.js
```

The full list of possible shadow paths for this root is
then:

```
theme-a/src/components/header.js
theme-b-parent/src/theme-a/components/header.js
theme-b/src/theme-a/components/header.js
theme-c/src/theme-a/components/header.js
<user-site>/src/theme-a/components/header.js
```

When choosing which file to use, we go from last to first in
this array. The user's site wins above all else, then we
traverse back up through the final ordering of themes for
potential matches until we find a file that exists or we end
up back at the original.

This is how shadowing works. If you import the root path
from `theme-a` the file the import resolves to will be the
latest filepath in the list. This allows themes to import
the root path and integrate with other themes that shadow
that root path without knowing about those other themes.

## Extending

Shadow roots and contexts don't do a lot to help us explain
single-path selection (unless we're talking about forking
multiple contexts... a topic for another day). They do
however explain something interesting about what happens
when a file further down in the shadow context imports a
file further up, like the root. Let's say `theme-b` wants to
shadow `header`, but instead of providing its own
implementation wants to modify `theme-a`'s implementation,
also known as extending.

```js
// theme-b/src/theme-a/components/header.js
import Header from "theme-a/src/components/header";

export default props => (
  <Header {...props} aProp="I want to change">
    With my own content!
  </Header>
);
```

In the normal case of any other component importing
`theme-a/src/components/header` the file returned can be any
of the shadow paths. This way even when shadowing is active
the import of any given shadow root will always yield the
same file, even if it's one of the shadow paths. This is
because the import is happening across shadow contexts. (The
two shadow contexts in this case are the other component's
and the header's, which is why we say the import happens
"across" contexts.)

### Importing within a context

When we are in a shadow context and import a "parent" shadow
path (for example if
`theme-b/src/theme-a/components/header.js` imported
`theme-a/src/components/header.js` as in the above code) we
receive the original file from `theme-a` instead of the file
the shadowing algorithm resolves to. If it did not work this
way we'd end up in an infinite loop because the shadowing
file in `theme-b` imports the shadow root and with shadowing
active, the shadow root resolves to the last shadow path in
the context (in this case, resolving to `theme-b` itself,
which then imports the shadow root for itself again).

## Fin

This post gave some insight into the mental model for
shadowing when it comes to importing from a different shadow
context and importing in the same shadow context. Our next
post on shadowing will cover what happens when you fork
shadow contexts and why forking shadow contexts can lead to
some very confusing behavior.
