export const meta = {
  title: "Starters and Themes Together",
  date: "2019-02-01T01:02:34.199Z",
  tags: ["gatsby", "gatsby-themes"],
  slug: "/post/starters-and-themes-together"
};

In the
[last post](/post/running-a-gatsby-starter-as-a-theme) in
this series, we converted the
[gatsby-starter-blog](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog)
repo into a theme. We only made changes that were absolutely
necessary so in this post we'll take a look at how starters
and themes can play well together as we move the content in
the theme out into a starter.

Our content is still locked in our theme, which isn't super
useful to theme consumers unless they want to display the
same content everywhere. Notably, in `gatsby-config.js` we
have a filesystem source pointed at our theme's
`content/blog` directory.

```js
{
  resolve: `gatsby-source-filesystem`,
  options: {
    path: `${__dirname}/content/blog`,
    name: `blog`,
  },
}
```

Removing the `__dirname` prefix causes the filesystem source
to look in the user's site for the `content/blog` directory.

```js
{
  resolve: `gatsby-source-filesystem`,
  options: {
    path: `content/blog`,
    name: `blog`,
  },
},
```

We'll move the `content/blog` directory from the theme into
our starter `my-blog`.

```sh
mkdir my-blog/content
mv gatsby-theme-awesome-blog/content/blog my-blog/content
```

Now, if we use our `my-blog` starter we can see that the
content a user is going to modify is included in the
starter, while all of the configuration is in the theme.
This is the key for how to decide what goes into a starter
that uses a theme and what goes into the theme itself.
Example content can go in a starter because it's likely to
get deleted by the user, while default pages can go in the
theme because they can be overridden by the user already.
